Hi, welcome back.
The last video we looked at mutability
and now we're going to look at passing arguments in Python.
Let's look at a couple examples of arguments in Python.
And I'm going to show you this dictionary here.
Dictionaries are a great example of mutable data structures.
And then we'll create a function called see_friend,
that is going to allow us to see a friend
that we didn't see for a long time.
So see_friend, friends, name, and this function,
all it will do, it will say friends[name] = zero.
If we pass in friends_last_seen, and 'Rolf',
it'll set 'Rolf''s value to zero instead of 31.
Now, here comes the interesting bit,
we're going to print out the id of friends here.
Inside the function, this is the parameter friends.
Then we'll also go into print the id of friends_last_seen,
which is our dictionary that is in the global scope.
Finally, we are going to call see_friend,
with friends_last_seen, and 'Rolf',
and we're going to print the id of friends_last_seen.
How many different numbers do you think
we are going to see here?
Hopefully, the answer was one, one number only.
But I mean, we'll see.
Notice how, the first thing we printed out
was this friends_last_seen here.
And it's a number.
Then we called see_friends,
and we passed in friends_last_seen.
The name changed over to friends,
but actually the number is still the same.
It's still the same dictionary, this one here.
Finally, when we exited the function,
after changing the inners property
of the friends dictionary, we printed out the id,
and it was still the same.
Now let's do something else.
I'm going to print the id of friends_last_seen, 'Rolf',
before we call the function
and then we'll go into print the id
of friends_last_seen['Rolf'], after we call the function.
Notice how friends_last_seen['Rolf']
will have changed from 31 to zero.
Now, how many different numbers do you think
we're gonna see printed out in total?
One, two, or three?
Hopefully, you said three, friends_last_seen['Rolf'] here
is the number 31.
Friend last seen 'Rolf' here is the number zero.
Integers are immutable, so whenever we change one,
that is a new integer being created, let's run it.
And as you can see, we have now three dictionaries here,
we have three different numbers here.
The first one is this friends_last_seen.
The second one is this id of 'Rolf', that's this one here.
Then we print the id of the friends dictionary,
same one as the first one.
Then we print the id of the new 'Rolf' number,
and notice how two and four are different.
And finally, we print the idea of the dictionary again,
which is the same.
So this is mutability in action.
What we've seen is that the friends_last_seen dictionary
has not changed itself.
But one of the properties inside it has.
Even though at no point,
we have modified the friends_last_seen dictionary,
we've only modified the value
that we passed to the function in there.
Let me delete the ids so I can explain things a bit better,
without all that gibberish.
So again, what's happening is that these variables,
friends_last_seen, and friends are just post-it notes
on the value, the value being this dictionary.
This dictionary, specifically with this id that we got.
When we pass the value here,
what's happening is that we are passing the value
of the variable, we're not passing the variable itself.
So the dictionary now gets assigned to friends.
Friends, is just another post-it note on the dictionary.
Indeed, we can print
whether friends = friends_last_seen.
The ==, is going to compare the contents.
So if there were two distinct dictionaries
with the same contents, this would return true.
But is compares for the ids.
So it's gonna tell us what they are exactly the same object.
And when we run it, we get true.
Because this friends variable here,
that has the value of friends_last_seen
is actually the same as the friends_last_seen variable
that was defined up here, the same dictionary exactly.
Therefore, when we mutate one,
that is changing the 'Rolf' property
of this dictionary up here.
Therefore, friends_last_seen['Rolf']
will have the value zero,
after we run the function, there we have it.
So immutability can be quite dangerous.
Because if you change the dictionary in this function,
and you're thinking, hey, yeah, we change the dictionary
now we can use it, for example,
say you wanted to use it here, some more,
you may not realise that it's actually changing
everywhere else that you use that same dictionary,
so it can be quite dangerous.
Okay, that's the concept of mutability.
However, if you go and have something like, age is 20,
and then a function that is increase_age,
and you do this, then you say id of age,
increase_age, id of age.
What we're doing here is defining a variable,
that is a post-it on the value 20.
Then we are getting the id of that 20.
We're calling increase_age, which has the value 20.
So current_age is another post-it on 20.
And now we're seeing this post-it now points to 20 plus one,
so that's 21, an entirely different number.
Then when we return, we print out the id of age.
What do you think we're going to see?
Are we going to see the same number twice?
Or are we going to see two different numbers?
Oh, we see nothing 'cause we didn't print them out.
Let's see if you guess that one, let's print it.
We get the same number twice.
What does that tell us on the value of age?
What is age here?
Age here is 20, what is age here?
But it must be 20 because it's got the same id
and we know that numbers are all different objects.
So what's happened is that this current_age variable
has the number 20 assigned to it.
But then what we've done is we've said
now the current_age variable is a post-it on 21.
Not on 20, age is still a post-it on 20.
So the number 20 has not changed,
it is only the variables that have moved
from one to another.
Again, an important concept for mutability.
If you do this on an immutable object,
it will just change within the function,
this variable will now point somewhere else,
but the outer elements will not change.
Let's give you a third example.
A list of prime numbers.
The id of primes will be something
we have to remember to print at this time though,
then we say primes += [7, 11].
And then we print the id of primes.
What do we think we're going to see now?
We get the same id back.
That is some bizarre functionality, right?
This one is primes = primes + [7, 11].
Surely it should be a different thing.
We've moved the variable from pointing to this list
now points to the longer list.
But remember, when I said that this is equivalent to this,
I was lying, it is not.
What's happening here is that primes = primes.iadd, that.
And it is up to the implementation of this function,
whether it's going to modify primes,
or whether it's going to create a new list
that determines whether this is going to be the same object
or a different one.
In this case, in case of the list,
and in case of a lot of objects,
when you do iadd when you do += or -=,
or *= or /=.
The Python official documentation
says that when you do that, one of these iadd, or isub
or imu, for multiply,
they should modify the object if possible.
So in the case of lists, iadd modifies the list.
Of course, if you do primes = [2, 3, 5] + that,
we're going to see two different numbers printed out here.
Because these are two things.
What if we do primes = primes + that?
We also get two entirely different objects printed out.
Again, what's happening here
is primes = primes add [7, 11].
It is not iadd, iadd is meant to where possible modify self.
Add does not have that requirement.
And in the case of lists, it has been implemented
so that it creates a new list.
So this is why this creates a new list entirely.
So it's all up to the implementation,
whether the objects are mutable or not.
So enough of this, just remember when you pass something
to a function, that you can potentially mutate that thing,
and then the value outside the function
will have changed too, for example, with dictionaries,
and you can do it with lists as well, if you use +=,
or indeed any other of the isomething functions.
Unless the thing you pass with the function is immutable,
in which case, when you try to change it,
it won't have changed outside the function only inside,
essentially what you've done as you move the variable
from one place to another.
Okay, that's it.
I hope that this, it's not to make a little bit of sense.
As you programme more in Python,
I think you'll be glad to have received this lecture
from me, in order to understand a bit more
of what's going on behind the scenes
with mutability and different variable.
It really is a frequent question
on a lot of online Python forums,
questions on Stack Overflow.
So it's really good to know
that this is how things are handled.
So with that said, I'll see you on the next video.